---
layout: post
title: "Boxer: Generating Sane JSON from Complex Objects for Our API"
author: bf
date: 2011-10-24
published: true
---

## The Problem

Here at Gowalla we have a large API with many different types of objects
distributed across many different resources. So composing and showing views of
those objects for API responses has been a challenge.

We started out by just rendering ActiveRecord models directly to JSON:

    class Api::UsersController < ApiController
      def show
        @user = User.find(params[:id])
        render :json => @user
      end
    end

But that quickly became unwieldy as we wanted full and simple control over
which attributes are returned, and to start returning method values alongside
model attributes. So we moved on to writing `.json.erb` files, which allowed
us to specify exactly what appears in a response:

    # app/views/users/show.json.erb
    <%= raw({
      :name => @user.name,
      :recent_spots => @user.recent_spots(30),
      :is_private => @user.private?
    }.to_json) %>

Though after a long while, these views ended up growing out of control, with
conditionals based on the authenticated user requesting the information,
whether they're friends, whether the user resource is a business, whether a
promotion is running, etc.

    # app/views/users/show.json.erb
    <%
      hash = {
        :name => @user.name,
        :is_private => @user.private?
      }
      if user.public?
        hash.merge!({
          :recent_spots => @user.recent_spots(30),
          :recent_highlights => @user.recent_highlights(10),
        })
      end
      if user.friends?(current_user)
        hash.merge!({
          :is_friend => true,
          :mutual_friends => user.mutual_friends(current_user).map(&:to_hash),
        })
      end
    %>
    <%= raw(hash.to_json) %>

## The Solution

So during our developing of Gowalla 4, we came across Nathan Esquenazi's
[RABL](https://github.com/nesquena/rabl) library, which is a great attempt
at attacking this problem. For our purposes, though, we went with a simpler
and less robust framework that would do exactly what we wanted.

Our simple framework, [Boxer](http://github.com/gowalla/boxer), knows about
different object representations, the various views each of our objects can
have and will let us compose objects together in responses that satisfy the
complexity of our large API.

Instead of defining messy conditional views full of merged hashes, Boxer
provides a clean framework for describing the representation and views of
an object as hashes:

    Boxer.box(:user) do |box, user|
      box.view(:base) do
        {
          :name => user.name,
          :age  => user.age,
        }
      end

      box.view(:full, :extends => :base) do
        {
          :email      => user.email,
          :is_private => user.private?,
        }
      end
    end

Then you can "ship" the contents of a box with a model object (or any other
arguments you want to pass in) and get a JSON-ready hash:

    >> Boxer.ship(:user, User.first, :view => :full).to_json
    => "{"name": "Bo Jim", "age": 17, "email": "b@a.com", "is_private": false}"

In our case, our controllers do more or less a straight render of a shipped
box:

    def show
      @object = Object.find(params[:id])
      render :json => Boxer.ship(:object, @object, :view => :full)
    end

For more examples and a more in-depth explanation, see the
[Boxer README](https://github.com/gowalla/boxer#readme) and the
[project wiki](https://github.com/gowalla/boxer/wiki).

Boxer also goes through the trouble of solving small and common problems that
creep up when using this style of framework. Things like [preconditions][1],
[helper methods][2], [including methods for use in boxes][3] and
[multiple box inheritance][4].

  [1]: https://github.com/gowalla/boxer/wiki/Preconditions
  [2]: https://github.com/gowalla/boxer/wiki/Helper-Methods-in-Boxes
  [3]: https://github.com/gowalla/boxer/wiki/Box-Includes
  [4]: https://github.com/gowalla/boxer/wiki/Multiple-Inheritance

We have released Boxer [as a gem](http://rubygems.org/gems/boxer) and, as
noted, an [open-source project on GitHub](https://github.com/gowalla/boxer).
Let us know what interesting uses you find for Boxer, in addition to any
suggested improvements.
